{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang3081{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.16299}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\nowidctlpar\b\f0\fs32\lang9 Post-Evolutionary Statics\b0\par
\par
\par
\i Abstract\i0\par
An evolutionary transition involves two events; evolution \i starts\i0  work on a new level in life's hierarchic edifice, and \i finishes \i0 work on the previous level. Thus, evolution has long ago finished work on, for example, the genetic code, on the cellularity of all life, and on the basic core of the process of development from zygote to mature multicellular organism. These things no longer evolve or change, but have remained the same for hundreds, even thousands, of millions of years. We shall refer to them as "post-evolutionary statics". Now, the dynamics by which evolution creates new levels has been reduced down to a general causal mechanism that applies equally to all levels. But the same has not yet been done with regard to post-evolutionary statics; study here still consists largely of descriptions of particulars. In this article, we shall reduce post-evolutionary statics down to a causal mechanism that applies equally at all levels. This causal mechanism will be seen to have important implications for ethics.\par
\par
\par
\i Introduction\i0\par
Life on earth is metaphorically likened to a multi-story edifice, and evolutionary forces are thought of as constructing this edifice from the ground up. At the lowest level (let us call it level 0), pre-biotic molecules join into prokaryotic and then eukaryotic cells at levels 1 and 2. Eukaryotes then join into multicellular organisms at level 3, and these form groups of various kinds and extents at levels 4 and upwards.\par
\par
When evolution finishes work on one level, and starts work on the next one, this is known as a "major evolutionary transition" (Maynard Smith and Szathmary 1995), or a MET. Now, starting with Darwin and Wallace, the dynamic process by which evolution builds new levels has been reduced down to a causal mechanism that repeats at every level, working in the same manner each time, only changing the building blocks that it works with. First, its building blocks were pre-biotic molecules; later, prokaryotic cells, then eukaryotic cells, and, right now, multicellular organisms.\par
\par
Researchers have expended a great deal of effort on working out the details of the causal mechanism of the dynamics of the evolutionary process. But what about the structures that evolutionary forces have finished working on? Since evolution has \i finished\i0  working on these structures, it is not the dynamic causal process of evolution that will help us understand them. No, we need other general causal mechanisms. But, so far, biology does not know of any. In this article, we shall try to remedy this deficiency. First, for easy reference, we need a name. Thus, we shall be referring to the structures that evolution leaves behind as "post-evolutionary statics". That term is meant to connote the idea that evolution has ceased acting on them, and that the said structures evolutionally "stand still" in the sense of remaining the same for very long periods of time (or perhaps changing only at the rate of very slow cosmic processes, such as the sun gradually burning up all its energy). We shall reduce post-evolutionary statics down to two general causal patterns; on the one hand, a set of causal laws of selfish survival that form a repeating pattern for each of the various horizontal levels in the hierarchic structures of life, and, on the other hand, a set of causal cooperative schemes that form another repeating pattern for the metaphoric vertical columns that separate and hold up the levels. Our laws and patterns will be seen to have some possibly important implications for altruism and ethics. More specifically, they allow us to theoretically predict the existence of an altruism in nature that comes much closer to what we humans, as living evolved beings, intuitively experience as real.\par
\par
\par
\i Evolutionary Dynamics\i0\par
Charles Darwin and Alfred Russell Wallace were first to describe the central core of the general causal mechanism by which evolution does its work. That central core, in Darwin's words, is "descent with modification" and "natural selection". Individuals inherit random variations, and, consequently, compete with different kinds and degrees of effectiveness for sometimes scarce resources. Those that happen to have more favorable variations are more likely to live long enough to reproduce and pass on their successful characteristics to their offspring. As this process is repeated many times, small changes accumulate and become large changes.\par
\par
Since Darwin and Wallace, a lot of additional research has been done, and we can now put together a more detailed picture. Here follows a fairly brief, and hopefully a tolerably accurate, account of some of its main features. Thus, the Earth was formed some 4,600 million years ago. Fairly soon after that, pre-biotic molecules at level 0 of life's edifice appeared in numbers, and began to combine in all sorts of random ways, until, by chance, there appeared systems that were capable of metabolism and self-replication. In a fairly orderly sequence, a rich variety of new systems appeared that were minor variations upon, yet competitively superior to, their predecessors, and able to eliminate them, only to be eliminated in their turn by still more efficient successors. After some 1,000 million years (which brings us to around 3,500 million years ago), this evolutionary process terminated in an optimal system that could no longer be improved on; namely, the \i prokaryotic cell\i0 . This is a cooperative arrangement of molecules that works well enough so that any further random variations upon its basic metabolic and self-replicating mechanism are almost always either indifferent, or worse. The world filled with prokaryotic cells in deadlocked competition; all of them being optimal, none could meaningfully eliminate the rest.\par
\par
And with that, evolutionary forces had finished building level 1 of life's edifice. Just to be clear about it, that first level consists of the optimized interior structure of the prokaryote. This is evolution's first finished product, and the first instance of our post-evolutionary statics. The expression "post-evolutionary" means that evolution no longer happens; the system, in Peter Godfrey-Smith's terminology (2009, p 101), is "de-Darwinized". And the term "statics" means that the structure stands still. It keeps on replicating down the eons, but without any significant evolutionary change; every new generation is pretty much the same as its predecessors.\par
\par
And what happens after that? Does evolution stop altogether? No; evolution gets to work on other things. John Maynard Smith and Eors Szathmary (1995) taught that evolution makes a transition to a higher level in life's hierarchy. Unable to improve the internal structure \i within\i0  the prokaryotic cell, evolution shifted its primary focus to what happened \i between\i0  cells. Now, as mentioned, those relations were in competitive deadlock. And evolutionary change could not take place unless that deadlock was first broken. But that could not be done by internally changing any of the prokaryotes so as to make them more efficient at individual competition against one another; their individual competitiveness relative to one another was already optimal. The only way to break the deadlock was to modify the prokaryotes internally so as to enable them to join up into cooperative units of two or more cells. Of course, in changing the prokaryotes so that they could cooperate, evolution must not interfere with the optimized internal metabolic and self-replicating mechanisms of each cell. Those mechanisms had to remain intact. All that evolution could do was to modify or add certain peripheral mechanisms. But that was enough; evolution found ways to break the competitive deadlock.\par
\par
Now, in switching from building cooperation \i within\i0  cells to building cooperation \i between\i0  cells, evolution switched over to new building blocks. Before, its chief building blocks had been pre-biotic molecules, which it assembled into prokaryotes that internally were cooperative systems, and that externally were in competition. After, this whole scheme had shifted up one level. Evolution's new chief building blocks were prokaryotic cells, which it assembled into multi-cellular systems that were internally cooperative, and that externally were in competition.\par
\par
The following might possibly be the causal mechanics of building cooperation. For a start, a cooperative unit must be able to replicate itself as one whole, while stopping its parts from independently replicating. Evolutionary transitions exhibit "...the common phenomenon that entities capable of independent replication before the transition can only replicate as parts of a larger whole afterwards." (Szathmary and Maynard Smith 1995, p 227). The mechanics of the evolutionary process has it that anything that can self-replicate independently of something else is necessarily in competition against that something else, and will either win or lose (or draw even) in a race to fill the world with more copies of itself than the other. Now, when the parts of a nascent cooperative unit compete, this is no longer called competition, but "cheating". And cheating is highly destructive of cooperation. To enable cooperation, a system therefore has to specifically evolve into being that has the express purpose of suppression of cheating. John E. Stewart calls such a system a "manager" (Stewart 2014), and says that a manager is able to impose "consequence-capture" (Stewart 2018) onto the parts that it manages. By that term, Stewart means that those that obstruct or destroy cooperation will be themselves destroyed, while those that support cooperation will be themselves supported. Stewart also suggests a way in which all this might evolve into being. Let us go back to our independently competing prokaryotic cells as they were before they began to cooperate. Undoubtedly, some prokaryotes were able to prey upon others. Indeed, they might have been dependent on finding ever fresh prey. But we can imagine that the supply of prey ran out. Predators then switched to a more benign way of life. Each gained control over one or more prey, defended these from rival predators, and sustainably harvested sufficient resources from them so that it could live, but not so much as to kill them. Those that did kill their prey also killed themselves, since there were no other unoccupied prey. In other words, exploitative predators turned into responsible managers. And their former prey, we may henceforth call "workers", on an analogy with a factory that has a manager and a team of workers. Naturally, a manager cannot tolerate cheats among its workers. No worker must steal from the company, or rob other workers in ways that reduce productivity, or be lazy. Each worker must produce as much as possible, and not interfere with the productivity of other workers. Also, each must consume neither more nor less than the necessary minimum for maximal productivity, and hand all its surplus production over to the manager. And the manager for his part must also consume neither more nor less than the minimum needed to remain an efficient manager, and use all that could be spared to expand and strengthen the factory as a whole. The manager, after all, is in competition against other managers, and only those that can make their enterprise as a whole maximally productive and competitive will survive. So it is in the world of business, and the same applies within cooperative communities of prokaryotes as well.\par
\par
Now, in the very early stages of the evolution of such managed cooperative wholes, we may suppose that the manager does only a rather poor to mediocre job. And poorly managed cooperative systems, of course, will be plagued by cheats and parasites. However, as evolution proceeds, a critical point is reached where there occurs a shift of balance of power. The cooperative whole ceases to be at the mercy of cheats and parasites, and gains control of things. And that is the point when an evolutionary transition occurs. Before the transition, the parts run things, cooperating if its suits their selfish ends, and defecting if not. After, the manager is in control, and the parts are left with no choice but to either submit, or be destroyed. Their former option of defection is gone. And so, they obediently allow themselves to be shaped strictly only for service of their whole. This shift of balance of power, once it has happened, is \i irreversible\i0 ; it passes a point of no return (Boomsma and Gawne 2017). The parts lose their capacity for independent selfish survival outside of their whole. Should that whole be destroyed, the parts go under as well. And they can never again go back to their former independence; that avenue is forever closed to them and will never again open. As Szathmary and Maynard Smith put it, "...mitochondria cannot resume independent existence... cancer cells may escape growth control, but have no independent future as protists; worker bees may lay male eggs, but cannot establish a new colony on their own." (Szathmary and Maynard Smith 1995, p. 228).\par
\par
When the parts become thus dependent on their whole, they are no longer properly called organisms, but parts of an organism. David Sloan Wilson and Elliott Sober write: "When between-unit selection overwhelms within-unit selection, the unit itself becomes an organism in the formal sense of the word." (Wilson and Sober 1989, p. 343).\par
\par
Our story has now come to a point where prokaryotes had formed cooperative wholes that worked well. An explosive diversification followed, an evolutionary radiation; many different kinds of cooperative systems appeared, eliminating their predecessors only to be eliminated by their successors. Stuart Kauffman (1995, pp. 13-14) likens it to the invention of the bicycle; at first, there were lots of rather wild variations, some with enormous front wheels, some with big back wheels, and so on; but as time passed, only a few optimal designs were preserved. Once more, evolution experimented for around 1,000 million years, which brings us to 2,700 million years ago. And this is when the process terminated in a second cooperative system that was optimized to the degree that any further random variations were almost always either indifferent or worse. The end product this time was the \i eukaryotic cell\i0 . These now filled the world, and were in competitive deadlock, all of them optimal and unable to meaningfully eliminate each other. Level 2 of life's edifice was complete; the interior of the eukaryotic cell was de-Darwinized, and evolution ceased happening there. Our post-evolutionary statics now had two levels, both of them stable enough to serve as a solid foundation upon which evolution could start building level 3. Indeed, evolution at any level N \i must\i0  cease before evolution at level N+1 can properly start; otherwise, level N will be too unstable to serve as a foundation for level N+1. John Maynard Smith writes: "The achievement of individuality at the higher level has required that the disruptive effects of selection at the lower level be suppressed." (in Fox and Wolf (editors), 2006, p 360).\par
\par
The same story then repeated itself, but yet one more level up; evolution used its tool of random variation to break the competitive deadlock between eukaryotes, and join them into still larger cooperative units. The process is much the same; predatory eukaryotes turned into managers, while their eukaryotic prey became workers. Once more, evolution labored for around 1,000 million years, which brings us to around 1,600 million years ago. That was when communities of eukaryotic workers, under the control of eukaryotic managers, had grown in power and efficiency so that they were able to tip the balance of power from all cheats towards themselves. Transition number 3 was an accomplished fact. And what was the end product this time? None other, of course, than the \i multicellular organism\i0 . Just like the prokaryotes and eukaryotes before them, multicellular organisms first appeared in all sorts of wild varieties, until a few optimal forms appeared that eliminated all sub-optimal competitors. The multicellular organism had been perfected to the point where any further random variations were either indifferent, or worse.\par
\par
Now, exactly in what way do we mean that multicellular organisms have been perfected? Are they (we) perfect in a moral, esthetic, epistemic, or other sense that flatters and gratifies the human ego? Not at all. What evolution had perfected were certain basic aspects of multicellularity as opposed to unicellularity. Those basic aspects are 1) a way to physically glue eukaryotic cells together, and 2) a division of labor between somatic and germline cells; and, 3) a very complex developmental process by which a multicellular organism is able to grow by clonal mitosis from a zygote to a mature organism; and, 4) a set of basic body plans for mature multicellular organisms. Those, and those alone, are the structures belonging to multicellular organisms that have been optimized to the point where any further variation almost always is indifferent, or a worsening. They have become a further addition to our post-evolutionary statics. But our moral goodness, or beauty, or wisdom, have not. These are things that evolution is now working on. If we ever do become perfectly morally good or beautiful or wise, it will be in some distant future. And if that happens, it will constitute the next level in life's hierarchy. For now, that level is a work in progress. Evolution, having finished using eukaryotic cells as its building blocks, has switched to multicellular organisms, which are now its building blocks. And it is trying to assemble these into systems that are internally cooperative, and that compete externally. That appears to be an exceptionally tough job. Teaching us moral goodness and wisdom is harder than anything that went before. When evolution was assembling pre-biotic molecules into prokaryotes, and prokaryotes into eukaryotes, and eukaryotes into multicellulars, it was able to literally, physically, stick its building blocks together into cohering, discrete physical objects. This made it rather easy to create the prokaryotic, eukaryotic, and multicellular versions of moral goodness and wisdom. Being literally glued together, parts at those lower levels had no choice but to live or die together. But evolution cannot seem to literally glue multicellular organisms together into larger units. Instead, evolution must from now on build cooperation through interaction between entities that are not physically joined together, but free to move about independently of one another. That is, evolution must now teach moral goodness and wisdom to entities that keep running away from their teacher, as well as from their moral duties. We eagerly turn up when the social cake is divided out, but absent ourselves when it is time to work on making a new one. Game theory teaches that, in places such as the free-mixing ocean, where there is little chance that two individuals will meet a second time, or even remember whom they have or have not met before, life is predominantly just pure, ruthless, selfish exploitation. As Robert Axelrod and William Hamilton write, "...impermanence of association tends to destabilize symbiosis." (Axelrod and Hamilton 1981/2010, pp. 354, 355). But on coral reefs, individuals are confined to smaller home ranges, wherein they keep on meeting the same individuals over and over again, and, more, often remember whom they have or have not met, and what happened at the last meeting. Under those conditions, ruthless exploitation ceases to be the optimal strategy, and the so-called "tit for tat" policy becomes the better policy. Thus, we cooperate with those that our past experience indicates are cooperators, but not with those that are not. On coral reefs, there appear, for example, such symbioses as those between parasite-laden host fish that need cleaning, and cleaner fish that eat the parasites. Now, confining living individuals to a small area where repeated meetings are frequent is to go \i part\i0  of the way towards literally gluing them together. That is why some degree of cooperation can appear when individuals are confined within smaller home ranges. But only literally gluing them together can make repeated meetings so absolutely inevitable and utterly inescapable that perfect cooperation appears rather quickly. It is because evolution cannot seem to stick multicellular organisms together into bigger units that it has such a hard time teaching us wisdom and moral goodness.\par
\par
The technical term for what evolution may eventually manage to build at level 4 is "superorganisms". It makes sense that one distinguishing characteristic of the superorganism is that it is composed of organisms that have attained to virtual perfection in moral goodness and wisdom. After all, there will be no more cheats, thieves, liars, or social saboteurs among them. How could that \i not\i0  constitute at least a \i huge advance \i0 in moral goodness and wisdom? But those superorganisms are, for now, only a chimera. The world of multicellular organisms today remains almost wholly one of war, of selfish competition, of cheating and stealing and free-riding. Indeed, we are so entrenched in this war-like state that we love it, and shudder in horror at the idea of being literally stuck together into superorganisms. The Communist experiment of the 20th century - an instance of cultural, not genetic, evolution - failed, largely because humans, according to their biologically inherited nature, just love taking their chances as lone, selfish survivors; they hate moral discipline imposed from any incipient level 4 above. Meanwhile, evolutionary forces impotently searches for ways. It changes dinosaurs into birds, and apes into humans; it brings organisms out of the marine environment and up onto the land, and then gives them wings and sends them up into the air. Then it brings airborne organisms back onto the ground (dodos and penguins and ostriches), and sends land animals back into the sea (marine reptiles and mammals). Round and round it goes; evolution is ever trying new forms, but is never able to hit upon those random variations that might one day culminate in superorganismic structure so optimal that any further random variation is either indifferent or worse. If and when that is accomplished, we can perhaps finally see global peace and harmony on this war-torn planet. Evolution, with its inherent competitive wars, will then cease altogether on earth; the entire biosphere will have been wholly de-Darwinized, and gone post-evolutionally static.\par
\par
A brief caution might be in order: Our post-evolutionary statics is not to be confused with the evolutionary stases described by Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge in their theory of punctuated equilibrium (see Eldredge 1999). Gould and Eldredge pointed out that evolutionary change is not necessarily a continuous process of change that mostly proceeds at roughly the same rather slow speed; no, rather, the rate of change varies considerably. Species typically appear out of an evolutionary spurt so rapid that the fossil record hardly has time to take down notes. Then they remain much the same over an average period of some 2 million years, whereupon they vanish from the record as suddenly as they appeared, terminating either in extinction of their lineage, or evolving, via another rapid spurt, into new species. The controlling factor behind all this would appear to be an environment that rarely changes at a slow, uniform rate, but usually changes suddenly, then stays the same, until there is another sudden change. And an evolutionary stasis is what evolution can tend to go into during those periods of little or no environmental change. But our post-evolutionary statics is a different thing. It includes those structures that are so stable and well-built that perhaps only an exceptionally extreme environmental change - a global nuclear war, or our sun turning supernova - could upset them. The meteorite strike some 65 million years ago ended virtually all evolutionary stases on earth. Notably, reptile dominance ended, and a mammalian megafauna took over. But our post-evolutionary statics survived the cataclysm. The genetic code - that is, which codons code for which amino acids - stayed the same, and was not affected at all by the meteorite. The fact that all life is built of cells also did not change. Neither did the basic core of the developmental process by which a multicellular organism grows from a zygote to a mature organism, nor basic body plans. These belong to a post-evolutionary statics that can only be changed by going dangerously close to wiping out all life on earth altogether.\par
\par
\par
\i Post-Evolutionary Statics\i0\par
I have tried to describe current understanding of the general causality of the dynamics by which evolution builds living entities. That current understanding is the final product of the work of a long series of distinguished scientists. Now, it seems to me that the intense work done to clarify the general causality of the above evolutionary dynamics has tended to make researchers somewhat blind to the fact that there is also a post-evolutionary statics of what evolution leaves behind, a statics that might also have general causal mechanisms of its own that are worth studying. We should note that, if post-evolutionary statics does operate according to general causal mechanisms, those general causal mechanisms are \i not \i0 those of the evolutionary process. Evolution, after all, has \i ceased\i0  working on these structures. They are de-Darwinized; what Darwin and Wallace taught us about life \i does not apply \i0 to them. If we are to understand whatever general causal mechanisms there are in post-evolutionary statics, we must forget evolution, and discover them right from scratch.\par
\par
As for now, study of post-evolutionary statics is at the level of descriptions of particulars. Molecular biologists study post-evolutionary statics within cells, and physiologists those within multicellular organisms, for example. And many biologists believe that, apart from the general laws of evolution, there are no other general laws in biology. Stuart Kauffman has written: "Since Darwin we turn to a single, singular force, Natural Selection, which we might as well capitalize as though it were the new deity." (1995, p. 8). Apart from that law, says Kauffman, biologists tend to believe that all is just particulars and accidentals (Kauffman 1995, p 22). Indeed, there is a philosophical discussion going on as to whether there are any laws of biology at all. Some doubt it (e.g. Smart 1963, Beatty 1995), while others try to argue by counterexample that there are. Frank-Kamenetskii (2013) suggests that it is a law of biology that, in all living organisms, genetic information is stored in DNA. Gregory J. Morgan suggests the Caspar-Klug theory of virus structure as a biological law (Morgan 2010). Other biological generalizations that have been championed as possible laws include Hamilton's Rule, the Hardy-Weinberg principle, and that prokaryotic DNA is circular while that of eukaryotes is linear, and that acquired characteristics cannot be inherited, and scaling laws, and Mayr's suggestion that speciation happens only with geographic isolation, and Ronald Fisher's explanation for the 1:1 sex ratio. And so on. But there is no consensus; Andrew Hamilton remarks that "...biology has no generalizations or regularities that can uncontroversially be called laws of nature." (Hamilton 2007, p. 592). The exceptions to all suggested laws are so many that they cannot even be fully listed; they are laws that "...hold except when they don't." (Hamilton 2007, p. 596). Yet, even so, there are biologists that do wish or hope for, or believe in, or even confidently anticipate, general laws other than that of the evolutionary process. William Hamilton wished that life is "...subject to far more mysterious laws" than those known at his time (Hamilton 1976, p. 2). Lance Grande hopes for "...as yet undiscovered repeating patterns in nature..." that will "...result in new concepts of major importance..." (Grande 1994, p. 80), and Edward O. Wilson writes of a "...search for algorithms used in nature that display common features across many levels of organization... [and that] might lead to deep new laws..." (Wilson 1998, p. 95). And Kauffman says: "...I believe that such laws can be found /.../ I even dare to hope that we can begin to sketch some of them now." (Kauffman 1995, pp 22-23).\par
\par
Naturally, I am confident that there are further laws. So far, however, biologists seem to have not quite known where to find them. That is where I suggest post-evolutionary statics as a possible solution. We can indeed learn something about a high-rise building by watching the bricklayers and plumbers and so on at work constructing it. But we cannot learn \i all\i0  about it that way. There is more to be learned if we come back to the finished building later, after all the construction workers and contractors have left, and other people have moved in and are using the building. Indeed, we might even learn more that way, since we are then free from distractions; we do not have to duck the careless plank-swinging carpenter, or listen to the noisy plumber that got a nail through his foot. And, by analogy, when we are not being distracted by the social chaos created by thieves and cheats and free-riders in evolving nascent cooperative wholes, but can see nothing but the finished post-evolutionary statics just as it is in itself, then we shall see that there are indeed more biological laws than the one first discovered by Darwin and Wallace.\par
\par
And so, we shall now reduce post-evolutionary statics down to a number of very simple and extremely general explanatory causal schemes. Thus, we shall set forth one set of fundamental causal laws of selfish survival that form a repeating pattern for the horizontal levels of life's edifice, and another set of fundamental cooperative causal schemes forming another repeating pattern for the metaphoric vertical columns separating and holding up the levels.\par
\par
\par
\i Four Causal Laws\i0\par
We will begin with the causal laws of selfish survival. The first such law is that, to exist, a living entity must be caused to exist. That law, of course, applies not only to living things, but to inanimate things as well; to atoms, clouds, stones, planets, and so on. But we are now concerned specifically with its application to living things. It has two aspects to it. Firstly, to exist, a living entity must \i appear\i0  in existence. In this, the said living entity is passively dependent on pre-existing causes to bring it into existence. A nonexistent entity, after all, cannot cause itself to exist, since it cannot exert causal power at all, but must wait for already existent things to cause it to be. Secondly, once a living entity exists, it must often depend on other existing objects for the causes that \i sustain\i0  it in existence. And here, there is room for a living entity to actively contribute to its own existence. Because it exists, it can exert causal power, and it can use that capacity to strengthen its own hold on existence by going in active pursuit of causes that can sustain it.\par
\par
Our first law may not seem quite like the usual, conventional kinds of scientific laws. But I do not suppose that any scientist would dispute the \i truth\i0  of our first law. It arises directly out of the paradigm of modern science itself, and can only be denied at the cost of denying the very philosophical basis upon which modern science is built. Science assumes that everything that exists does so because it is an effect of pre-existing causes that exert law-bound causal power acting from the past towards the future. And that assumption is verified when many things are found to have such pre-existing causes, and no thing is definitely proven to exist without a prior cause. As indicated, scientists do not usually regard this as a law of science, but as a philosophical assumption belonging to the paradigm within which modern science subsists. But we shall now treat it as a scientific law. And scientific laws, of course, are supposed to explain phenomena. So which phenomena does this law explain? As it turns out, the answer is not quite as inane as may first appear. Our first law is the most natural general explanation for three classes of empirical phenomena in the living world; why living things have \i properties\i0 , why they appear at certain \i places in time and space\i0 , and why they perform certain \i behaviors\i0 . Why is a zebra a zebra, and a bird a bird? Because things can only have those properties that their preceding causes are able to give them. Why are there no elephants on the moon, or dinosaurs today? Because living things can only appear at those points in space and time where their preceding causes are able to place them. And why do many living things perform actions such as eating, breathing, photosynthesis, and the like? Because once a living entity exists, it can often only continue to exist if it performs certain positive actions to avail itself of necessities of life that the world provides, and that cause it to continue to exist.\par
\par
So we have our first causal law of selfish survival: "Living entities can only exist if caused to exist". We can rephrase that as life's first imperative: "Be caused to exist!". But that first law is not all there is. Here is another: "An existent thing can only remain in existence as long as it is not caused not to exist". Or, in imperative form: "Do not be caused not to exist!". Now, this second law can be regarded as logically equivalent to the first. In logic, adding a double negative to a sentence does not alter its meaning; \i p\i0  and \i not-not-p \i0 say the same thing. Yet our second law seems grammatically more felicitous than the first in explaining two more classes of empirical phenomena; why some living things \i vanish\i0  from existence, and why some living things in danger of vanishing succeed in \i not\i0  vanishing. Why did this or that living entity cease to exist? Because senescence overtook it, or because it had some bad luck (it ran afoul of a predator, perhaps, or a lightning strike, or a too-drastic environmental change). Why did this or that living thing that was in danger of vanishing from existence succeed in not vanishing? If it is a lineage, perhaps it is because it managed to evolve its way around some challenge. Or, if it is an organism, and therefore cannot evolve, because it ran away or hid from a predator, or successfully stayed clear of some poison, or a steep precipice. Unlike animals, plants cannot run, but they too must certainly deal with causal factors that threaten their existence, such as, for example, herbivorous predators and parasites. And one common strategy of plants is to make their tastier and more nutritious parts as tiny and as inaccessible as possible, and their more accessible parts (such as bark or leaves) tough, fibrous, nutritionless, and tasteless (kids seldom love their vegies much).\par
\par
So far, then, we have two general causal laws of selfish survival. But there is more. The reality of \i causal chains \i0 opens the door to a whole world of additional survival imperatives. A third causal law is that an existent living thing may exist better if it causes to exist that which causes it to exist. This law explains why moles dig burrows to live in, and why spiders spin webs. It also explains reciprocal altruism. Robert Trivers, who first defined reciprocal altruism, cites cleaning symbioses among fish as an example. Some fish are badly plagued by ectoparasites. So they regularly visit a "cleaner fish" that makes a living by eating the parasites. The host may even permit the cleaner to clean the inside of its open mouth. Why does not the host eat the cleaner and get a really easy dessert after the cleaning? Not from benevolence, but because it may be hard to find another good cleaner (Trivers 1971)\par
\par
To the above, we shall add a fourth causal law; namely, that a living thing, once it exists, may improve its prospects of existence if it causes not to exist that which would cause it not to exist. This explains why, for example, a cornered prey animal, unable to run or hide as per our second law, may turn aggressively upon its predator and attempt to destroy at least the intention of the predator to eat it, and, if it can, the predator as well. Aggression is also used by plants when they develop spikes and poisons. These appendages do more than just deter hungry herbivores; they are offensive weapons that tend to \i injure\i0  any animal that gets too persistent.\par
\par
\par
\i Further Causal Laws\i0\par
We have set forth four causal laws, which, in imperative form, are as follows: 1) "Be caused to exist!"; and: 2) "Do not be caused not to exist!"; and: "Cause to exist what causes you to exist!"; and: 4) "Cause not to exist what would cause you not to exist!". But those four are far from all such laws that there are. Here is yet one more: A living entity may exist better if it causes not to exist that which would cause to exist that which would cause not to exist that which causes it to exist. This rather complicated law is exemplified in reality. Thus, some food hoarding animals store seeds in a large underground hoard, and live on their hoard during lean times. Naturally, to stop the hoard from being plundered by thieves, the owner must keep it secret. And this is not so easy. For one thing, seeds buried underground tend to sprout. If a lot of seedlings suddenly appear in one place, other animals may be able to tell that there is a cache of food hidden there, and burglar it when the owner is absent. To stop that, the owner removes telltale seedlings (Vander Wall 2001, p 179). The owner, then, causes not to exist seedlings that would cause to exist thefts that would cause not to exist a cache that causes the owner to exist.\par
\par
Yet another causal law of some complexity has it that a living entity may cause to exist that which causes to exist that which ...causes to exist that which causes it to exist. This is our third law extended. And there are real life examples of this too. Manfred Eigen and Peter Schuster describe a "hypercycle" (see Maynard Smith and Szathmary 1999, p 48-49), where the stickleback fish excretes nitrogen-rich fecal matter that causes algal growth, which then serves as food for water fleas, which serve as food for the stickleback fish. Food webs are riddled with such hypercycles. Another example of our extended third law is indirect reciprocity (see Roberts 2008). Here, cooperative individuals cooperate, not just with others that directly cooperate with them, but with any member of the group that has a reputation for generally being a reliable cooperator.\par
\par
In short, apart from our four causal laws, there are innumerable others; indeed, as many as there are possible causal chains that go around in a circle and come back to the initiating cause with positive causal power. And some of the real life examples above show that evolutionary forces can be sensitive to even quite long and complex laws. Still, the first four that we looked at are probably fundamental - all the rest can be regarded as composites of them. The first two laws - "Be caused to exist!", and "Do not be caused not to exist!" - are simple, in that they contain only one causal relation. They also seem to be \i obligate\i0 ; life \i must\i0  obey them on pain of certain and immediate nonexistence. All other laws are composite - composed of two or more causal relations. Of all composite laws, our third and fourth laws are the simplest. But all composite laws are optional, in that it is possible for living things to exist by compliance with the first and second laws alone. Even so, of course, most real living things soon enough develop dependences on various composite laws.\par
\par
\par
\i Horizontal and Vertical Repeating Patterns\i0\par
Note now that our causal laws apply to pre-biotic molecules, to cells, to multicellular organisms, and to groups of organisms. They apply, in other words, at all levels in life's hierarchy. In fact, they form a \i repeating pattern that appears at every level\i0 . We might therefore call those laws the \i horizontal repeating pattern \i0 of our post-evolutionary statics.\par
\par
Our causal laws can explain \i everything\i0  that happens at and within any one level. Indeed, since our causal laws pretty much define the very paradigm of modern science, it cannot be otherwise. We have already looked at some things that the four laws can singly explain. But in combination, they can explain more. The first and second laws, in combination, can explain the Darwin-Wallace evolutionary mechanism itself. The first part of the said mechanism, as noted, is "descent with modification". This is a lineage's special way of obeying the first causal law as it perpetuates itself by producing yet another generation. And the second part of the evolutionary mechanism, "natural selection", is basically our second causal law in action. With every new generation, a lineage must face anew the environment, which sorts fit variations from unfit ones. The fit is that which manages to obey the second law, and that can therefore continue to exist; the unfit is that which fails in obedience to the second law, and vanishes from existence.\par
\par
Our causal laws can also explain other things. Thus, the second and fourth laws together form the "fight or flight" response (Bradford Cannon 1915), and the competitive exclusion principle (Gause 1934). Meanwhile, the combination of the first and third laws explains cheating in reciprocal altruism; the cheat attempts to convert a costly third-law arrangement into a less costly first law one.\par
\par
So much for what there is at and within any one single finished level in life's edifice. But what is there between any given two neighboring levels? This is where we need to extend out post-evolutionary statics with another repeating causal structure, one analogous to the vertical columns holding up the stories of a building. Now, which are the things that exist at the lower level? Answer: Parts. And which are the things that exist at the upper level? Answer: Wholes. The parts at the lower levels hold up the wholes above by cooperating with one another. And so, we need now to study the causality of cooperation. That causality, I believe, can be analyzed in terms of at least four different causal patterns. I shall name these the Pattern of Enduring Parts, the Pattern of Damaged Parts, the Pattern of Harmful Parts, and the Pattern of Expendable Parts. And they are what we shall look at next.\par
\par
\par
\i Enduring Parts\i0\par
A living whole displays the Pattern of Enduring Parts when it has parts that, each one 1) endures as long as the whole does, and 2) survives by the four causal laws, and 3) does so, not as its highest end, but as a means to the end of serving the whole as that whole seeks its survival by the same four laws. In this last, we assume, but shall not here try to detail, a conception of means and ends that builds entirely on efficient causation alone, and no final causation.\par
\par
In surviving by the four laws, and also helping their whole do the same, the parts perform what we may call a "mereological differentiation". That is, they apply the causal laws simultaneously at two levels; their own, and the one above. Now, each part must observe all four causal laws to ensure its own survival. The whole must also observe all four causal laws to ensure its survival. It must therefore have at least one part for each causal law. But it is not necessary that each part must, by mereological differentiation, lift up all four laws. No, they are free to settle upon a system of specialization of labor. And that is also what they usually do. For example, an animal may have a digestive system that helps it survive by the first causal law, and a cryptic coat coloration that helps it survive by the second causal law. It may also have burrowing behaviors that help it survive by the third causal law, plus aggressive responses to help it survive by the fourth causal law. In general, it profits a whole that its parts specialize. It is the general principle, known also by tradesmen, that it is better that each does one task well than that all do all tasks poorly.\par
\par
The Pattern of Enduring Parts is found to apply between every pair of neighboring levels in life's edifice. Consider the two levels of prebiotic molecules and unicellular organisms. Many prebiotic molecules form enduring parts of the cell, and exhibit a division of labor in their service of the survival of their whole. Thus, a unicellular organism would typically have an enduring digestive apparatus by which it obeys the first causal law, and an enduring defensive apparatus for avoiding or destroying enemies (viruses, for example), as per the second and fourth causal laws. Unicellular organisms may also have enduring parts for engaging in mutualistic symbioses with one another. Jonathan P. Zerh and colleagues (2016) write: "An unusual symbiosis between an uncultivated unicellular cyanobacterium (UCYN-A) and a haptophyte picoplankton alga was recently discovered in oligotrophic oceans." The cyanobacterium, it seems, is able to reduce nitrogen gas (N\sub 2\nosupersub ) to biologically useable nitrogen (N), and gives some of it to the unicellular alga in return for fixed carbon.\par
\par
Going up to the two levels of the cell and the multicellular organism, we need not dwell long on that; our hypothetical example above of the animal with a digestive system for obeying the first causal law, and a cryptic coat coloration for obeying the second law, and so on, will serve here. That said, we hasten on to the two levels of multicellular organisms and groups. Among social insects, we find differentiated castes that are the result of individuals taking different developmental paths as they grow from a zygote to a mature adult. These different adult forms are often irreversible. Some individual ants are soldiers - they have powerful weapons for defense of the colony (the fourth law). Others are workers, specialized for building a safe and inaccessible nest (the second law), or foraging for food (the first law). The honeypot ant (\i Myrmecocystus mendax\i0 ) even has individuals that serve the first law by functioning as living food containers. They live in special chambers, suspend themselves from the ceiling, and have swollen abdomens full of honey, which they dispense to hungry fellow ants. But does an ant colony also cooperate with outside objects, as per the third causal law? It does. In Central America, the ant species \i Pseudomyrmex ferruginea \i0 aggressively protects a plant, the bullhorn acacia (\i Acacia cornigera\i0 ) from herbivorous animals, including even very big ones. In return, the plant provides housing and food for the ants (Janzen 1966). Indeed, different ant colonies are not always inevitably at war; they can engage in some very extensive cooperation. In Southern Europe, an enormous supercolony of Argentine ants has been found that extends along more than 6,000 km of Mediterranean and Atlantic coastline, and includes millions of nests and queens and billions of workers (Giraud et al. 2002). Ants, apparently, can build high levels of intraspecific peace. Yet, even though mammals generally are more selfish and warlike (see Wilson 1975, p 379), they too form organized groups with division of labor. The leader of, for example, a troop of chimpanzees or baboons is often a so-called \i mesomorph\i0  - an extra big and strong and aggressive alpha male. He tends to grab the best food and reproductive opportunities for himself, but he also keeps the group unified by settling disputes. Jane Goodall observed how the death of a strong leader caused a large group of chimps to split into two smaller groups at war with one another (see Barras 2014, p 12). The leader, then, is important in group unity; he functions as a manager that suppresses potentially destructive competition within the group. But he also functions as a part that specializes in serving the group via some of the causal laws. For instance, his wisdom and experience enables him to lead the group to green pastures with plenty of food, as per the first causal law. He also leads the group away from danger, as per the second law. In addition, he aggressively defends the group from predators, as per the fourth law. But what about the third causal law? Here, the so-called \i ectomorphs\i0  of the group may come into it. They are smaller and not so aggressive, but, at least among humans, considered to be smarter and more theoretical-minded. And perhaps it is the same in non-human animals as well. On the Japanese island of Koshima, scientists were able to observe a cultural change in the island's macaque population. One young female, Imo, "...pioneered the habit of carrying sweet potatoes to the water to clean off the dirt. Her mother and closest peers soon followed, and the habit spread to others. Within a decade, the whole of the population under middle age was washing potatoes." (Waal 1999). This seems a case where brainy individuals in a group of mammals specialize in devising third causal law relations by which the whole group can survive better. Now, of course, an individual mesomorph or ectomorph may not last so long, but \i lineages\i0  of them last as long as the group does, and can be considered enduring parts of it.\par
\par
Apart from primates, other vertebrate species too form groups wherein individuals specialize for different tasks classifiable under the four causal laws. Thus, individuals in a group of Belding's ground squirrels take turn acting as sentries that warn the group of approaching predators (Sherman 1977). These individuals endanger their own lives in order to help the group survive by the second law. There are also cases where different groups join together into cooperative third law arrangements to combat a common enemy. Toshitaka N. Suzuki, for example, describes a case of heterospecific mobbing of predators. Japanese great tits, coal tits, and willow tits get together to mob predators common to all three species. Suzuki suggests that it is "...\lang3081 possible that birds benefit from mutualism in that they cooperatively prevent predators from learning to view the avian nests as a profitable food source..." (Suzuki 2016). We may also mention so-called "Mullerian mimicry". Noxious species of prey animals may have brightly colored warning patterns. Sometimes, different species have different, species-specific patterns. But when several noxious species cooperate by sharing the same pattern, they all benefit; predators need only have a bad experience with one species to subsequently avoid all of them  see McFarland 1993, p 95).\par
\par
\i Damaged Parts\i0\par
The Pattern of Enduring Parts, then, is found to operate between every pair of neighboring levels in life's hierarchy. Let us pass on to \lang9 the Pattern of Damaged Parts. This need not take long. If a part of a cooperative system is damaged, the other parts may help repair the damage. For instance, in a cell, the DNA may suffer damage; perhaps it breaks off in the middle, for example. The cell then responds with enzymes that repair the damage (Maynard Smith and Szathmary 1999, p 35-37). Within a multicellular organism, an organ may also suffer damage or disease; and, of course, it is common knowledge that broken bones and wounds to the skin heal, and that the body has a capacity to recover from illness. Even cooperative groups of organisms have ways to repair damage to the cooperativeness of an individual. Suppose that a human being has his feelings hurt by some careless words uttered by someone else in the group. He becomes sulky, and refuses to cooperate. An apology from the one that hurt him will fix the damage.\par
\par
\lang3081\par
\i Harmful Parts\i0\par
From the Pattern of Damaged Parts, we pass on to that \lang9 of Harmful Parts. Thus, a living whole may contain parts that harm the whole. To survive, the whole must stop those harmful effects. And it is the other parts that are activated to do this job. We may say that those parts perform a mereological differentiation on the second and fourth causal laws, and lift these up to the higher level in order to apply them to a part within the same whole.\par
\par
Just like the Pattern or Enduring Parts, that of Harmful Parts is also at work between every pair of levels in life's hierarchy. Again, we will look at examples. Now, in idealized and perfectly integrated wholes, there is no cheating, but many real living wholes at all levels are continually plagued by it. And every cheat is, at least potentially, a Harmful Part of that whole. If a cheat cannot be permanently destroyed, then it must be policed and controlled. And it is the rest of the whole that does this. For example, in a cell, some sections of DNA chain may break off and start replicating out of control. They cheat; they seek their own individual reproductive success in ways that harm the whole. Law-abiding DNA reacts with enzymes that hunt down and eliminate such bits of escaped "outlaw DNA" (Maynard Smith & Szathmary 1999, p 21). This is the Pattern of Harmful Parts suppressing harmful cheating between the two levels of prebiotic molecules and cells.\par
\par
Ascending to the levels of cells and multicellular organisms, we note that, every day, due to radiation, viruses, or chemicals, a few cells in our body turn cancerous. That is, they escape normal controls on cellular mitosis, and start replicating at a speed that, if not curtailed, may destroy us. Again, they seek selfish reproductive success in ways that destroy their whole. And the body responds with white blood cells that are manufactured on a continual basis, and that can detect and destroy cancer cells. It is only occasionally that a cancer manages to escape being destroyed (see Solomon et al. 1985/1996, p 939, 949, or Maynard Smith & Szathmary 1999, p 21). Usually, the system is pretty effective at preventing cancer. Again, we have a case of the Pattern of Harmful Parts, this time between the two levels of cells and multicellular organisms.\par
\par
And at the two levels of multicellular organisms and groups of them, we humans are more than familiar with cheats, thieves, betrayers, and manipulative individuals generally. And law-abiding citizens join together to institute various means to control such people. For example, we apply social censure, ostracism, fines, jail, and sometimes even execution. This is the Pattern of Harmful Parts in defense of human societies. But we find the same thing also among other animal species. A vampire bat that has found plenty of food, but does not share with unlucky fellow bats, may be at risk of starving to death when others soon cease to share with it (Wilkinson 1984).\par
\par
Apart from cheats, harmful parts may appear in other ways too. A damaged part that cannot be fixed via the Pattern of Damaged Parts may come to be seen by the whole as a harmful part. Perhaps it positively does harm, or perhaps it merely acts as a dead weight that consumes resources without contributing anything. And the whole then responds with the Pattern of Harmful Parts. For example, if a tooth suffers damage, the living pulp within it may become infected and die. If the infection cannot be eliminated, it may spread to the jawbone, the head, the neck, and other body parts. The body then attempts to contain the infected tooth, together with pus, dead bacteria, and tissue debris, within an abscess; an impermeable wall that prevents the spread of the ailment. If that strategy works, the problem tooth will eventually loosen and fall out, together with pus and other debris. Something similar might also happen within a group of organisms. Suppose that the person above has his feelings hurt so much, and from such a young age, that he grows up more or less permanently antisocial. Unable to apply the Pattern of Damaged Parts, the group switches to that of Harmful Parts; the irreparably damaged individual is killed, or abandoned, or ostracized, or exiled, or otherwise gotten rid of. Also, at least the human species has been known to practice geronticide, or senicide; that is, the killing of aged individuals that have become a burden. I dare say that other species do the same, although I cannot cite any examples.\par
\par
Now, in imperfectly integrated wholes, we may expect the harmful part to resist when the other parts try to destroy it. Human criminals often try to escape justice, for example. But in strongly integrated wholes, a part that turns harmful will not fight, but willingly cooperate in its own destruction. Consider a tadpole tail, useful to the tadpole, but harmful to the adult frog. If the tail was selfish as its highest end, it might try to persist into the adult phase, and thus harm the frog. But this does not happen. During metamorphosis, the tail is resorbed and the materials used to build other structures. And the tail is entirely cooperative; it does not put up a fight, or create trouble for the frog. No, the tail has internal mechanisms by which, when given the signal, it automatically self-destructs without the rest of the organism having to apply coercion. We might say that the tail volunteers to commit suicide for the good of its whole. Should individual tadpole tails start to dig their heels in and refuse to commit suicide when given the signal to do so, their kind might go extinct, simply because frogs might. Selection between individual frogs have favored strong integration, and weeded out all obstreperous tails, so that only those with the most submissive and obedient rear ends remain.\par
\par
Let us consider one more kind of harmful part within a whole, one that we might call a "pseudopart". An example is when a brood parasite, such as the cuckoo, lays its egg in the nest of another species. If the host is fooled, the alien egg becomes a harmful part of the host's group. It does not harm a mother bird's own selfish survival to sit on a cuckoo egg and feed a cuckoo while her own offspring die. But it harms her offspring, her future lineage, her close kin group. And the mother bird, in defense of her group, evolves sophisticated abilities to discriminate and eject alien eggs from her nest. Once more, this is the Pattern of Harmful Parts at work.\par
\par
\par
\i Expendable Parts\i0\par
Going on now to the Pattern of Expendable Parts, some living wholes can have parts that are made to destroy themselves in the course of enabling the whole to exist by the four causal laws. Such expendable parts may well specialize in serving their whole via any one of the four causal laws. And as the whole runs out of expendables, it may manufacture new ones. As in the Pattern of Enduring Parts, all four causal laws are lifted by mereological differentiation to the higher level, but with the difference that the parts do not endure; they are expended, and, in many cases, replaced with new equivalents.\par
\par
Like the other three Patterns, this one also applies between every pair of neighboring levels. Consider the two levels of prebiotic molecules and cells. A cell makes ATP molecules that destroy themselves to energize cellular processes, as per the first causal law. Other molecules may go to their own destruction to turn away or destroy threats to the cell, as per the second and fourth causal laws. And as all these molecules are used up, the cell manufactures new ones. As for the third causal law, there are endolithic fungi that can tunnel into rock, even down to an amazing depth of 3 km. They obey the third causal law in a similar way as a mole that digs a burrow to live in. And in order to dig, the fungus produces acid molecules that destroy themselves to excavate the rock.\par
\par
The Pattern of Expendable Parts operates also at the two levels of cells and multicellular organism. A multicellular organism produces macrophages that destroy themselves as they engulf and immobilize foreign possibly harmful micro-objects, as per the fourth causal law. And as macrophages are used up, the organism makes new ones. The outermost skin cells (the \i stratum corneum\i0 ) are an example of expendables serving the second causal law. These cells die and are continually worn off as they keep harmful influences out of the delicate structures within. And new skin cells are continually manufactured in the layer underneath, the \i stratum basale\i0 . So-called \i mycorrhizae\i0  (Rovira 1965; Wilde 1968; Marks & Kozlowski 1973; Smith 1980) can serve as an illustration of expendables serving the third causal law. A tree needs the help of certain fungi to obtain certain soil minerals. So the tree make sugar molecules, which at first can be considered parts of the tree, but which are sent out of the tree and given to the fungi as payment for its services. The fungi then destroy the sugar to obtain energy. These sugar molecules (which are admittedly not cells, but prebiotic molecules) qualify as expendable parts, continually manufactured by the tree, to help it exist by the third causal law. Now, molecules and cells are often small, cheap, and readily expendable, but whole organs are more expensive, and not sacrificed as often. Yet there are cases of this. The leaves of deciduous trees photosynthesize for the tree during summer, and die and fall off when winter cold sets in, and are replaced with new ones the next spring. The leaves are expendable parts made by the tree as it seeks existence via the first causal law. Organs are also sacrificed for the second causal law. Thus, some lizards sever their tail for a predator to feast on while the rest of the lizard escapes. Later, the lizard grows a new tail. As for the third causal law, an example here might be humans that sometimes sell their hair to wigmakers. So also is the illegal trade in kidneys for organ transplant, although, unlike hair, the body cannot in this case manufacture replacements. As for the fourth causal law, porcupine quills have backward-directed barbs that may detach from the porcupine and remain lodged in the flesh of a predator attempting to eat the porcupine. This is an example of an organism sacrificing organs to secure further existence by the fourth law.\par
\par
Going on to the two levels of multicellular organisms and groups of them, the Pattern of Expendable Parts operates here also. Human explorers have sometimes died, or at least risked death, in order to find new trade routes by which their community can obtain life-sustaining items. This seems a case where conscience, a manager of human societies, sends out individual humans as self-sacrificing parts so that the community can exist better by the first causal law. And when young people are born with similar consciences, and are inspired by heroic explorers of the past to also become explorers, the group manufactures replacements. As for the second and fourth causal laws, many animals are known to mob predators. Large male baboons may approach an intruding leopard, while vocalizing, making threatening moves, displaying their fangs, and pulling the predator's tail and then quickly running away. Groundnesting gulls with chicks move \i en masse \i0 towards, say, a fox, screeching raucously, dive-bombing the intruder with excrements, pecking at its eyes, and generally trying to behave an unpleasantly as possible. Mobbers may initiate attacks even on a predator that is not attacking them (Altmann 1956). In Germany, starlings have been observed to launch massive attacks on sparrow hawks (Gersdorf 1966). If the predator stands its ground, the intent of the mobbers can turn deadly. Starlings have, on rare occasions, managed to kill a hawk. Of course, mobbing is usually most dangerous for the mobbers; indeed, some predators even provoke mobbing in order to more easily catch them (Sordahl 1990). Mobbing individuals, then, seem to serve as expendable parts that are continually manufactured by the group, and sent out to destroy themselves so that the group can exist better by the second and fourth causal laws. As for the third causal law, an example here is the coral fish \i Pempheris oualensis\i0 , which lives together with its predator \i Cephalopholis argus\i0 , allowing the latter to eat them, provided that the predator 1) does not eat so much that the prey goes extinct, and 2) protects the group from other, worse, predators (see Wilson 1975, p 38). Ants, of course, are well known for their fungus farms; that is another case of the third law. Humans treat domesticated food plants and animals in the same way. Schneider (2016) has written of a possible non-human case of predators that farm their prey for meat; the farmer here is a species of ants.\par
\par
Like the other three patterns, then, the Pattern of Expendable Parts is found between every pair of neighboring levels in life's hierarchy. Now, in poorly integrated wholes, expendable parts may resist, and the whole responds with coercion that may be quite costly. For example, undisciplined soldiers tend to malinger and desert, and the army responds by actively hunting down, catching, and punishing deserters. But in strongly integrated wholes, no such costly efforts are needed; expendable parts, uncoerced, volunteer for suicide in order to serve their wholes, and, indeed, may resist if it is attempted to stop them. The lizard tail in our example above is entirely cooperative; when given the signal to detach, it promptly does so by its own internal mechanisms.\par
\par
I have now gone through those four causal patterns involving wholes and their parts that I am able to discern. There may be other causal patterns as well, but I do not know what they might be. And not only have I completed my description of the three causal patterns, but I have also demonstrated, with examples, that the patterns repeat between every pair of levels in the edifice of life.\par
\par
And there it is; our description of the causal mechanics of our post-evolutionary statics. To repeat, we have a set of causal laws of selfish survival, forming a horizontal pattern that repeats and structures each level in life's edifice, and we have a set of causal cooperative patterns that together form a vertical repeating pattern for the columns holding up and separating the levels.\par
\par
\par
\i Ethics\i0\par
How true are the laws and patterns of our post-evolutionary statics? The causal laws seem in themselves self-evidently true, while the causal patterns appear highly plausible. We have also supported them with empirical evidence. And their truth will be further reinforced if they can lead to sound conclusions in other fields. There is, in fact, a world of unexplored consequences that follow from our post-evolutionary statics. For one thing, our Pattern of Harmful Parts might help enlighten us about the mortality of all life above the prokaryotic level. But we shall here look at ethics. Let us skip over what some (e.g. Rosenberg 2010, p 359) consider the most important concern - namely, the "is-ought divide" - and look at something a little easier. Now, from the \i dynamics \i0 of evolution, very little by way of morally admirable altruism can be deduced. That is because, while living entities are actively evolving, they are predominantly interacting in selfish competition. At most, we get kin altruism (Hamilton 1963, 1964a&b), and reciprocal altruism (Trivers 1971). And that is very little when compared to the much more extensive altruism that we humans, as living things, intuitively feel must exist.\par
\par
By contrast, our post-evolutionary statics shows us that altruism in nature is considerably more extensive and genuine than the Darwin-Wallace evolutionary mechanism suggests. In particular, each of our four causal cooperative patterns has it that we are made to survive selfishly, never as an end in itself, but only as a means to the higher end of serving our whole. Indeed, our duty is even to die whenever this serves the good of the whole. That ethical conclusion has so far been lacking from biological theory. Only now, with our post-evolutionary statics in hand, can we finally conclude theoretically what we have always known intuitively to be true. And it is, I dare say, a pretty important conclusion. Indeed, we can elaborate on it by looking at some results from moral philosophy. I shall take just one example. Thus, moral philosopher Richard Hare has analyzed the concept of duty (Hare 1981), and found it to consist of three part-concepts; \i prescriptiveness\i0 , \i universalizability\i0 , and \i overridingness\i0 . Prescriptiveness is the property of telling us what to do, while universalizability is the property of applying to all without exception. And overridingness says that a moral duty always overrides all selfish concerns. That is, we may never make morality a means to our selfish ends; it must always be the other way around. And our post-evolutionary statics can explain all three of these conceptual parts of duty. Thus, the prescriptiveness of a duty is the force with which every law of nature is enforced upon the world. In highly integrated wholes, parts get no choice as to whether or not to comply with their duties. But human groups are usually not so strongly integrated. That is why we humans feel torn between either doing our duty to the group, or betraying the group for selfish advantage. We experience the prescriptiveness of the moral law as more of a suggestion than an irresistible compulsion. As for universalizability, this element of duty flows from the natural fact that, for cooperation to work, there must be no cheats or betrayers; every part of a cooperative whole must do its duty, and no exceptions can be tolerated. And overridingness is simply another way to saying what we said before; the parts of a strongly integrated whole survive selfishly, not as their highest end, but always strictly only as a means to the end of serving the whole as it seeks its selfish survival.\par
\par
\par
References:\par
\par
Altmann, Stuart A. (1956). \i Avian Mobbing Behavior and Predator Recognition\i0 . The Condor, 1 July 1956, Vol. 58 (4), pp. 241-253\par
\par
Axelrod, Robert, and William D. Hamilton (1981). \i The Evolution of Cooperation\i0 . Science 211, 1390-1396. Here reproduced in Rosenberg, Alex and Robert Arp (2010). \i Philosophy of Biology\i0 . Wiley-Blackwell\par
\par
Barras, Colin (2014). \i Secrets of the only known chimp war\i0 . New Scientist, May 10 - May 16, 2014. Vol 222 (2968), p 12\par
\par
Beatty, John (1995). \i The Evolutionary Contingency Thesis\i0 . In Wolters, G. and J, Lennox (editors): \i Theories and Rationality in the Biological Sciences\i0 . The Second Annual Pittsburgh/Konstanz Colloquium in the Philosophy of Science. pp 45-81. University of Pittsburgh Press\par
\par
Boomsma, Jacobus J. and Richard Gawne (2017). \i Superorganismality and caste differentiation as points of no return: how the major evolutionary transitions were lost in translation\i0 . Biological Reviews, 05/15/2017\par
\par
\kerning1\lang3081 Bradford Cannon, Walter (1915): \i Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear, and rage\i0 . New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts\par
\par
\kerning0\lang9 Eldredge, Niles (1999). \i The Pattern of Evolution\i0 . W. H. Freeman and Company, New York\par
\par
Fox, Charles W. and Jason B. Wolf (editors) (2006). \i Evolutionary Genetics. Concepts and Case Studies\i0 . Oxford University Press\par
\par
Frank-Kamenetskii (2013). \i Are there laws in biology? Comment on 'How life changes itself: the Read-Write (RW) Genome' by James Shapiro\i0 . Physics of Life Reviews 10, pp. 328-330\par
\par
\kerning1\lang3081 Gause, Georgii (1934): \i The Struggle For Existence \i0 (1st ed.). Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins\par
\par
\kerning0\lang9 Gersdorf, E. (1966). \i Beobachtungen uber das Verhalten  von Vogelschwarmen. Observations on the behavior of bird flocks\i0 . Zeitschrift fur Tierpsychologie. March 1966 Vol. 23 (1) p 37-43\kerning1\lang3081\par
\par
\kerning0\lang9 Giraud, Tatiana; Jes S. Pedersen; Laurent Kelle (2002). \i Evolution of supercolonies: The Argentine ants of southern Europe\i0 . The National Academy of Sciences, 2002.\par
\par
Godfrey-Smith, Peter (2009). \i Darwinian Populations and Natural Selection\i0 . Oxford University Press, Oxford\par
\par
Grande, Lance (1994). \i Repeating Patterns in Nature, Predictability, and "Impact in Science\i0 ". Here in Lance Grande and Olivier Rieppel (editors) (1994). \i Interpreting the Hierarchy of Nature. From Systematic Patterns to Evolutionary Process Theories\i0 . Academic Press, Inc.\par
\par
Hamilton, Andrew (2007). \i Laws of Nature: Problems and (Dis)Solutions\i0 . Philosophy Compass 2/3. 592-610\par
\par
Hamilton, William D. (1963). \i The evolution of altruistic\par
behavior\i0 . American Naturalist, 97, pp 354-356 \par
\par
Hamilton, William D. (1964a&b). \i The genetical evolution of social behaviour. I and II\i0 . Journal of Theoretical Biology 7 (1): pp 1\endash 16 and 17-52\par
\par
Hamilton, William D. (1976). \i Narrow Roads of Gene Land, Vol. I. Evolution of Social Behaviour\i0 . W. H. Freeman at MacMillan Press\par
\par
Hare, Richard (1981). \i Moral thinking: its levels, method, and point\i0 . Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press.\par
\par
Janzen, Daniel H. (1966). \i Coevolution of mutualism between ants and acacias in Central America\i0 . Evolution. 20 (3): 249\endash 275.\par
\par
\lang3081 Kauffman, Stuart (1995). \i At Home in the Universe\i0 . Oxford University Press\lang9\par
\par
Marks, G.C. & T. T. Kozlowski (1973). \i Ectomycorrhizae. \i0 Academic Press, New York\par
\par
Maynard Smith, John and Eors Szathmary (1995). \i The Major Transitions in Evolution\i0 . Freeman, Oxford\par
\par
Maynard Smith, John and Eors Szathmary (1999). \i The origins of life. From the birth of life to the origin of language\i0 . Oxford University Press.\par
\par
McFarland, David (1993). \i Animal Behavior \i0 (second edition). Longman Scientific and Technical\par
\par
Morgan, Gregory J. (2010). Laws of biological design; a reply to John Beatty. Biol. Philos. 25: pp. 379-389\par
\par
Roberts, Gilbert (2008). \i Evolution of Direct and Indirect Reciprocity. \i0 Biological science, Vol. 275, No. 1631 (Jan 22, 2008), pp. 173-179\par
\i\par
\i0 Rosenberg, Alex (2010). \i Darwinism in Contemporary Moral Philosophy and Social Theory\i0 . In Alex Rosenberg and Robert Arp (editors): \i Philosophy of Biology. An anthology\i0 . Wiley-Blackwell 2010\i\par
\par
\i0 Rovira, A.D. (1965). \i Interactions between plant roots and soil microorganisms\i0 . Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 19: 241-266\par
\par
Schneider, Scott A. (2016). \i The Meat-Farming Ants: Predatory Mutualism Between Melissotarsus Ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) and Armored Scale Insects (Hemiptera: Diaspididae). \i0 Doctoral Dissertations. 687.\par
\par
Sherman, Paul W. (1977). \i Nepotism and the Evolution of Alarm Calls\i0 . Science, 23 September 1977, Vol.197 (4310), pp.1246-1253\par
\par
Smart, J. J. C. (1963). Philosophy and Scientific Realism. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul\par
\par
Smith, S.E. (1980). \i Mycorrhizas of autotrophic higher plants. \i0 Biol. Rev. 55: 474-510\par
\par
Solomon, Eldra Pearl. Linda R. Berg, Diana W. Martin, Claude Villee (1985/1996). \i Biology\i0 . 4th edition. Saunders College Publishing\par
\par
Sordahl, Tex A. (1990). \i The Risks of Avian Mobbing and Distraction Behavior: An Anecdotal Review\i0 . The Wilson Bulletin, 1 June 1990, Vol.102 (2), pp. 349-35\par
\par
Stewart, John E. (2014). \i The direction of evolution: The rise of cooperative organization. \i0 Biosystems 123 (2014) pp. 27-36\par
\par
Stewart, John E. (2018). \i Evolutionary possibilities: Can a society be constrained so that 'the good' self-organizes? \i0 World Futures, 74 (2018) pp 1-35\par
\par
Suzuki, Toshitaka N. (2016). \i Referential calls coordinate multi-species mobbing in a forest bird community\i0 . Journal of Ethology 34(1): 79\endash 84.\par
\par
Szathmary, Eors and John Maynard Smith (1995). \i The Major Evolutionary Transitions\i0 . Nature, Vol. 374, 16 March 1995.\par
\par
Trivers, Robert (1971). \i The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism\i0 . The Quarterly Review of Biology 46 (March): 35-57\par
\par
Vander Wall, Stephen B. (2001). \i Food Hoarding in Animals\i0 . University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London\par
\par
Waal, Franz B. M. de (1999). \i Cultural Primatology comes of age\i0 . Nature 399 (June 17, 1999) pp 635-636\par
\par
Wilde, S.A. (1968). \i Mycorrhizae and tree nutrition. \i0 Bio-Science 18: 482-484\par
\par
Wilkinson, G. S. (1984) \i Reciprocal food sharing in the vampire bat\i0 . Nature 308: 181-184\par
\par
Wilson, David Sloan and Elliott Sober (1989). \i Reviving the superorganism. \i0 Journal of Theoretical Biology, 1989, Vol.136 (3), pp. 337-356\par
\par
Wilson, Edward O. (1975). \i Sociobiology. The New Synthesis\i0 . The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.\par
\par
Wilson, Edward O. (1998). \i Consilience. The Unity of Knowledge\i0 . Vintage Books (Random House)\par
\par
Zehr, Jonathan P., Irina N. Shilova, Hanna M. Farnelid, Maria del Carmen Mu\'f1oz-Mar\'edn & Kendra A. Turk-Kubo (2016). \i Unusual marine unicellular symbiosis with the nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium UCYN-A\i0 . Nature Microbiology volume 2, Article number: 16214 (2016).\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f1\fs22\par
}
 